README.md, before:

# Act Runner with Rootless Podman-in-Podman

A containerized act_runner setup using Alpine Linux with rootless Podman-in-Podman (PinP) support for running Gitea Actions.

## Features

- ✅ **Rootless Podman-in-Podman**: Both outer and inner containers run without root privileges
- ✅ **Alpine-based**: Minimal image size using Alpine Linux
- ✅ **Ephemeral Mode**: Runner automatically uses `--ephemeral` flag for one-time job execution
- ✅ **Auto-restart**: Container configured with `--restart=always` policy
- ✅ **Automatic Registration**: Registers runner on first start using environment variables

## Prerequisites

- Podman installed on your host system
- Access to a Gitea instance with Actions enabled
- Runner registration token from your Gitea instance

## Quick Start

### 1. Get Your Runner Token

1. Log in to your Gitea instance
2. Navigate to: `Site Administration` → `Actions` → `Runners`
3. Click "Create new runner" and copy the registration token

### 2. Build the Image

```bash
podman build -t act_runner:latest .
```

### 3. Run with Podman

#### Option A: Using the run script

Edit `run.sh` to set your Gitea instance URL and token, then:

```bash
chmod +x run.sh
./run.sh
```

#### Option B: Manual run command

```bash
podman run -d \
  --name act_runner \
  --restart=always \
  --security-opt label=disable \
  --device /dev/fuse \
  -e GITEA_INSTANCE_URL="https://your-gitea-instance.com" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_REGISTRATION_TOKEN="your_token_here" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_NAME="my-podman-runner" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS="ubuntu-latest:docker://docker.gitea.com/runner-images:ubuntu-latest" \
  -v act_runner_data:/home/runner/data:Z \
  -v act_runner_containers:/home/runner/.local/share/containers:Z \
  act_runner:latest
```

#### Option C: Using Podman Compose

1. Copy the environment file:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` with your Gitea details

3. Run with compose:
   ```bash
   podman-compose up -d
   ```

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Description | Example |
|----------|----------|-------------|---------|
| `GITEA_INSTANCE_URL` | Yes | Your Gitea instance URL | `https://gitea.example.com` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_REGISTRATION_TOKEN` | Yes | Runner registration token from Gitea | `abc123...` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_NAME` | No | Custom name for the runner | `my-runner` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS` | No | Runner labels (comma-separated) | `ubuntu-latest:docker://...` |

## Configuration

### Container Configuration

The runner is configured via `config.yaml` with the following key settings:

- **Podman Socket**: Uses rootless Podman socket at `/run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock`
- **Storage**: Persistent data stored in `/home/runner/data`
- **Non-privileged**: Runs without privileged mode for security
- **Cache**: Enabled by default for faster job execution

### Rootless Podman Setup

The container includes:

- **User**: Non-root `runner` user (UID 1000)
- **Subuid/Subgid**: Configured for user namespace mapping (100000:65536)
- **Storage Driver**: Overlay with fuse-overlayfs for rootless operation
- **Cgroup Manager**: cgroupfs for rootless compatibility

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Host System (Podman)                    │
│                                         │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ Outer Container (rootless)        │ │
│  │ - Alpine Linux                    │ │
│  │ - act_runner (--ephemeral)        │ │
│  │ - Podman (daemonless, rootless)   │ │
│  │                                   │ │
│  │  ┌─────────────────────────────┐ │ │
│  │  │ Inner Container (rootless)  │ │ │
│  │  │ - Job execution environment │ │ │
│  │  │ - Uses Podman-in-Podman     │ │ │
│  │  └─────────────────────────────┘ │ │
│  └───────────────────────────────────┘ │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Managing the Runner

### View Logs

```bash
podman logs -f act_runner
```

### Stop the Runner

```bash
podman stop act_runner
```

### Remove the Runner

```bash
podman rm -f act_runner
```

### Restart the Runner

```bash
podman restart act_runner
```

## Volumes

Two persistent volumes are created:

1. **act_runner_data**: Stores runner registration and cache data
   - Location: `/home/runner/data`
   - Contains: `.runner` file, cache directory

2. **act_runner_containers**: Stores Podman images and containers
   - Location: `/home/runner/.local/share/containers`
   - Contains: Image layers, container storage

## Security Considerations

- ✅ **Rootless**: Both outer and inner containers run as non-root
- ✅ **Ephemeral**: Runner automatically deregisters after each job
- ✅ **Isolated**: Each container has its own user namespace
- ⚠️ **SELinux**: `--security-opt label=disable` is required for Podman-in-Podman
- ⚠️ **Device Access**: `/dev/fuse` is required for overlay filesystem

## Troubleshooting

### Container won't start

Check if `/dev/fuse` is available:
```bash
ls -l /dev/fuse
```

### Podman socket not available

Check logs for Podman service startup:
```bash
podman logs act_runner | grep -i podman
```

### Runner not registering

Verify environment variables are set correctly:
```bash
podman exec act_runner env | grep GITEA
```

### Jobs failing to run

Check inner Podman status:
```bash
podman exec act_runner podman info
```

## Advanced Configuration

### Custom Labels

To run jobs with specific labels, set them during registration:

```bash
-e GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS="linux-amd64:docker://node:20-alpine,custom-label:docker://custom-image"
```

### Resource Limits

Add resource constraints to the container:

```bash
podman run -d \
  --name act_runner \
  --memory=4g \
  --cpus=2 \
  ... # other options
```

### Custom Config

To use a custom config file, mount it:

```bash
-v /path/to/custom-config.yaml:/home/runner/.config/act_runner/config.yaml:Z,ro
```

## Files Overview

- `Dockerfile` - Multi-stage build for act_runner with Podman
- `config.yaml` - Act runner configuration with Podman settings
- `entrypoint.sh` - Startup script that initializes Podman and runs act_runner
- `containers.conf` - Podman container runtime configuration
- `storage.conf` - Podman storage configuration for rootless mode
- `run.sh` - Helper script to run the container
- `docker-compose.yml` - Compose file for easy deployment

## References

- [Act Runner Repository](https://gitea.com/gitea/act_runner)
- [Gitea Actions Documentation](https://docs.gitea.com/usage/actions/overview)
- [Podman Rootless](https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/main/docs/tutorials/rootless_tutorial.md)

## License

This configuration is provided as-is for use with act_runner. Please refer to the [act_runner license](https://gitea.com/gitea/act_runner/src/branch/main/LICENSE) for the runner itself.

Commit message:

Add security hardening and Ubuntu-only image restriction
Implemented comprehensive security measures for rootless Podman-in-Podman act_runner:

Security Features:
- Added Podman wrapper script to enforce Ubuntu LTS images only (24.04, 22.04, 20.04)
- Implemented registry allowlist via policy.json (docker.io, ghcr.io, quay.io, gcr.io, docker.gitea.com)
- Added seccomp profile to block dangerous syscalls
- Applied container hardening: --cap-drop=ALL, --no-new-privileges
- Configured registry mirror support in containers.conf

Configuration Changes:
- Removed network isolation (per user request)
- Removed resource limits (per user request)
- Updated config.yaml with security options
- Created config.secure.yaml with full documentation
- Changed volumes from named to bind mounts (./data, ./containers)

File Changes:
- Renamed docker-compose.yml → compose.yaml (Podman-friendly naming)
- Updated all references in README and run.sh
- Added SECURITY.md documenting all security measures
- Updated Dockerfile to integrate wrapper and policy

Technical Details:
- Podman wrapper intercepts image pulls and blocks non-Ubuntu images
- Policy.json enforces registry restrictions at Podman level
- Seccomp profile blocks mount, ptrace, reboot, and other dangerous syscalls
- All containers remain rootless (outer: UID 1000, inner: UID 100000+)

README.md, after:

# Act Runner with Rootless Podman-in-Podman

A containerized act_runner setup using Alpine Linux with rootless Podman-in-Podman (PinP) support for running Gitea Actions.

## Features

- ✅ **Rootless Podman-in-Podman**: Both outer and inner containers run without root privileges
- ✅ **Alpine-based**: Minimal image size using Alpine Linux
- ✅ **Ephemeral Mode**: Runner automatically uses `--ephemeral` flag for one-time job execution
- ✅ **Auto-restart**: Container configured with `--restart=always` policy
- ✅ **Automatic Registration**: Registers runner on first start using environment variables

## Prerequisites

- Podman installed on your host system
- Access to a Gitea instance with Actions enabled
- Runner registration token from your Gitea instance

## Quick Start

### 1. Get Your Runner Token

1. Log in to your Gitea instance
2. Navigate to: `Site Administration` → `Actions` → `Runners`
3. Click "Create new runner" and copy the registration token

### 2. Build the Image

```bash
podman build -t act_runner:latest .
```

### 3. Run with Podman

#### Option A: Using the run script

Edit `run.sh` to set your Gitea instance URL and token, then:

```bash
chmod +x run.sh
./run.sh
```

#### Option B: Manual run command

```bash
podman run -d \
  --name act_runner \
  --restart=always \
  --security-opt label=disable \
  --device /dev/fuse \
  -e GITEA_INSTANCE_URL="https://your-gitea-instance.com" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_REGISTRATION_TOKEN="your_token_here" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_NAME="my-podman-runner" \
  -e GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS="ubuntu-latest:docker://docker.gitea.com/runner-images:ubuntu-latest" \
  -v ./data:/home/runner/data:Z \
  -v ./containers:/home/runner/.local/share/containers:Z \
  act_runner:latest
```

#### Option C: Using Podman Compose

1. Copy the environment file:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` with your Gitea details

3. Run with compose:
   ```bash
   podman compose up -d
   ```

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Description | Example |
|----------|----------|-------------|---------|
| `GITEA_INSTANCE_URL` | Yes | Your Gitea instance URL | `https://gitea.example.com` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_REGISTRATION_TOKEN` | Yes | Runner registration token from Gitea | `abc123...` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_NAME` | No | Custom name for the runner | `my-runner` |
| `GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS` | No | Runner labels (comma-separated) | `ubuntu-latest:docker://...` |

## Configuration

### Container Configuration

The runner is configured via `config.yaml` with the following key settings:

- **Podman Socket**: Uses rootless Podman socket at `/run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock`
- **Storage**: Persistent data stored in `/home/runner/data`
- **Non-privileged**: Runs without privileged mode for security
- **Cache**: Enabled by default for faster job execution

### Rootless Podman Setup

The container includes:

- **User**: Non-root `runner` user (UID 1000)
- **Subuid/Subgid**: Configured for user namespace mapping (100000:65536)
- **Storage Driver**: Overlay with fuse-overlayfs for rootless operation
- **Cgroup Manager**: cgroupfs for rootless compatibility

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Host System (Podman)                    │
│                                         │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ Outer Container (rootless)        │ │
│  │ - Alpine Linux                    │ │
│  │ - act_runner (--ephemeral)        │ │
│  │ - Podman (daemonless, rootless)   │ │
│  │                                   │ │
│  │  ┌─────────────────────────────┐ │ │
│  │  │ Inner Container (rootless)  │ │ │
│  │  │ - Job execution environment │ │ │
│  │  │ - Uses Podman-in-Podman     │ │ │
│  │  └─────────────────────────────┘ │ │
│  └───────────────────────────────────┘ │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Managing the Runner

### View Logs

```bash
podman logs -f act_runner
```

### Stop the Runner

```bash
podman stop act_runner
```

### Remove the Runner

```bash
podman rm -f act_runner
```

### Restart the Runner

```bash
podman restart act_runner
```

## Volumes

Two directories are mounted from the host:

1. **./data**: Stores runner registration and cache data
   - Mounted to: `/home/runner/data`
   - Contains: `.runner` file, cache directory

2. **./containers**: Stores Podman images and containers
   - Mounted to: `/home/runner/.local/share/containers`
   - Contains: Image layers, container storage

## Security Considerations

- ✅ **Rootless**: Both outer and inner containers run as non-root
- ✅ **Ephemeral**: Runner automatically deregisters after each job
- ✅ **Isolated**: Each container has its own user namespace
- ⚠️ **SELinux**: `--security-opt label=disable` is required for Podman-in-Podman
- ⚠️ **Device Access**: `/dev/fuse` is required for overlay filesystem

## Troubleshooting

### Container won't start

Check if `/dev/fuse` is available:
```bash
ls -l /dev/fuse
```

### Podman socket not available

Check logs for Podman service startup:
```bash
podman logs act_runner | grep -i podman
```

### Runner not registering

Verify environment variables are set correctly:
```bash
podman exec act_runner env | grep GITEA
```

### Jobs failing to run

Check inner Podman status:
```bash
podman exec act_runner podman info
```

## Advanced Configuration

### Custom Labels

To run jobs with specific labels, set them during registration:

```bash
-e GITEA_RUNNER_LABELS="linux-amd64:docker://node:20-alpine,custom-label:docker://custom-image"
```

### Resource Limits

Add resource constraints to the container:

```bash
podman run -d \
  --name act_runner \
  --memory=4g \
  --cpus=2 \
  ... # other options
```

### Custom Config

To use a custom config file, mount it:

```bash
-v /path/to/custom-config.yaml:/home/runner/.config/act_runner/config.yaml:Z,ro
```

## Files Overview

- `Dockerfile` - Multi-stage build for act_runner with Podman
- `config.yaml` - Act runner configuration with Podman settings
- `entrypoint.sh` - Startup script that initializes Podman and runs act_runner
- `containers.conf` - Podman container runtime configuration
- `storage.conf` - Podman storage configuration for rootless mode
- `run.sh` - Helper script to run the container
- `compose.yaml` - Compose file for easy deployment

## References

- [Act Runner Repository](https://gitea.com/gitea/act_runner)
- [Gitea Actions Documentation](https://docs.gitea.com/usage/actions/overview)
- [Podman Rootless](https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/main/docs/tutorials/rootless_tutorial.md)

## License

This configuration is provided as-is for use with act_runner. Please refer to the [act_runner license](https://gitea.com/gitea/act_runner/src/branch/main/LICENSE) for the runner itself.
